Plasma Youth Sports Games
with Unsuccess of the champion,
would like to thank Slaven Bilić
for stepping in as the host.
Bilić is one of the first sponsors,
ambassador and is our biggest promoter.
He used his life and sports experience
in order to prepare high-quality content
with his guests for all generations.
Thanks, Nane!
When you look behind you,
what was your strong point?
Apart from the serve and volley.
I don’t understand, I asked you that...
How is it possible that your
favorite court is Wimbledon
and that you are famous for it,
not just because you won?
So, grass and London can’t be
more different from Split,
since there are no
grass courts there.
Unless you played on the
Poljud football stadium.
In Split, you played on
clay or concrete courts.
How come the grass courts
suited you more?
It was love at first sight
when I first played on grass.
I didn’t particularly enjoy
playing on that surface,
but my style was suited to it.
And that immediately brought results.
Another thing was that I could
always wear white clothes.
They were clean, I could wear
the same socks for five days
and didn’t have to wash
them from the dirt.
Everything was soft, beautiful,
and smelled nice.
There was complete order.
And I always had good results.
Sometimes I would prepare
for Wimbledon at Lora's
indoor court on a tartan surface.
I slipped a few times there,
and the crowd laughed at me.
And that’s when I got injured.
That’s why many people wondered
how I could be so good,
yet never train on grass courts.
I just loved those grass courts.
Otherwise, my style of playing...
I was the biggest "pimpler",
which means someone who...
Since I grew up on clay,
I never came to the net.
I would run for three days.
When I turned professional,
my style changed 380 degrees.
Serve and volley, aggressive play.
And yet, sometimes I could adapt
to playing on clay courts,
standing back, running, and if needed,
playing like that for three days.
Incredible.
We talked about this earlier,
but I don’t agree with that.
They always said you had
trouble with mental preparation.
Maybe if compared to Sampras or Borg,
but you were something else...
If I were to compare you
to someone in football,
for me, you'd be like
Gascoigne or Cassano.
Do you know how long they'd
last in the world of tennis?
One second.
To me, you're a "monster"
because of your achievements.
How did you prepare for matches?
You and I have a mutual friend,
but he’s like a brother to me, Ivo Kuzzi.
He was with you at the US Open.
He told me about it earlier,
and we talked again days ago.
What fascinated him about you
was your transformation.
You played the US Open round of 16
on center court against Rafter.
And in the morning, you and he
played small football in Central Park.
You were focused on that game,
2determined to beat him.
He played carefully
so he wouldn’t hurt you.
You were completely
dedicated to that game.
Then when you played cards,
you'd get upset and tear them.
And then suddenly,
as if nothing had happened,
you'd go to center court
in front of 20,000 people.
Ivo told me Trump was there.
And you won. You switched.
Things like that relaxed me.
I remember it was an evening match.
If I woke up at eight in the morning
thinking about the match,
I wouldn't have prepared well.
We’d go to Central Park,
play football, play cards,
and that filled me up.
I took football very seriously.
I didn’t want to lose.
And when we played cards,
I wanted to win even more.
When we played Briškula and Trešet,
those were my rituals.
That was it, until warm-up began.
Then, I focused only on the match.
What I did earlier filled my day
and sharpened my focus.
That’s just how it was.
Even though I lost that match,
and Rafter won the US Open.
That’s how I relaxed. -Yes.
If you spent the whole day,
from eight in the morning
until eight in the evening,
only thinking about the match,
you’d lose energy.
But those were big swings,
going from one extreme to another.
We football players did that,
but it’s still a team sport.
That’s something different,
but we’ll talk about that now.
You are a great athlete.
You love all kinds of sports.
You even trained football at Hajduk.
-Yes, I did. When you were the coach.
Where did that come from?
Just to say, it used to be normal,
and it’s not a bad message for kids.
And this is a show for kids.
Of course, primarily for kids.
It used to be normal for kids
to try at least two sports.
Balić trained basketball
before switching to handball.
Toni Kukoč trained football,
Štimac played handball,
and I also trained swimming.
Did you train football before,
or only in 2001 when I was coach?
At first, I trained a little,
but then I had to decide.
But in 1997, I had a few of
the best weeks of my life.
I remember it was year-end,
and my arm was hurting.
At that time, Hajduk allowed me
to train with the juniors.
In the juniors then, there were
players like Pletikosa, Deranja,
Miladin... That was the 1979
generation. -Šera, Sablja.
During those weeks,
Ivo also joined me.
Zoran Vulić was the coach,
and sometimes Ivić showed up.
I even got advice from Ivić.
I froze up because of him,
and also because of Vulić.
I really enjoyed it.
Those were some of the best
weeks of my life.
I’d come to training, go to the
junior locker room for my things.
That’s something unforgettable.
Where does this Hajduk obsession
come from for everyone?
Anyone born in Split
supports Hajduk.
Hajduk is loved,
and people live for it.
But I love football.
It might be my favorite sport.
I might even love it
more than tennis.
I’m not one of those people
who only watches the national team.
I follow matches in the first,
second, and third leagues.
I follow all our clubs
in international matches.
Since your time,
and even now.
I just love football.
Now, when I trained with Novak,
he also loves football.
He would often ask: "Goran,
where does this player play?"
And I’d just answer him,
because I knew them all.
I love football.
You trained two clubs I love
the most, Hajduk and West Bromwich.
I was also invited to West Bromwich.
I was on their field and in their locker room.
When Roy Hodgson was the coach.
I love football, and I enjoy it.
I love watching matches,
and I also love playing.
Currently, I play less
because my knee hurts.
It was something new for me,
being part of a team.
Coming to training in the morning,
being part of something different.
They even accepted me well.
Everyone accepted me.
And truly...
I had never played football before,
except in front of my house.
I never had a coach tell me:
"Lean forward, position your body..."
Like Vule, who was my coach.
I started training,
becoming part of the team.
I started learning how to
move the ball faster.
How to cross the ball,
how to play with the team.
Those days really stayed with me.
-When such giants...
I’ll tell you a short story.
It’s about Toni Kukoč,
who is your relative.
Toni and I lived
in the same building.
He lived on the first floor,
I lived on the fourth.
I’m ten days older than him.
Our parents knew each other.
I knew him well, but we
hadn’t seen each other in years.
A few years ago,
Hajduk played Villarreal in qualifiers.
I was with Leo,
and he was with his godfather.
But I sat next to him. He was,
of course, wearing a Hajduk jersey.
It was late July or early August.
Hajduk lost and didn’t go through.
Villarreal was better.
At the end of the match,
there was a special atmosphere
in the northern stand.
While watching,
you could see tears in his eyes.
And I heard him say:
"Why did I never play here,
but 1.5 km away, up there?"
I thought he was joking.
He played with Jordan, was in Chicago,
was the best European player...
And yet he said something like that.
Or you, in 2001, when I was Hajduk’s coach.
That was my first coaching job.
It was really possible to sign you
and have you play in the league.
Because you won Wimbledon.
That impossible desire for Hajduk.
I lived in Split in a building
known as the "Chinese Wall."
First, I lived on... then we moved...
It’s simply in my blood.
Maybe they injected something
into my blood when I was born.
It doesn’t matter if you play
for Hajduk or just love it.
It simply can’t be described.
My six-year-old son supports Hajduk.
I always tell him he can support Hajduk
only after we pass Sveti Rok.
A few days ago, when we were in Split
at my grandparents' house, he said:
"Dad, on every building here,
it says Hajduk or has graffiti with it.
That doesn’t exist in Zagreb.
People here are much more relaxed."
I told him Split is different.
The atmosphere is different.
The love for the club is different.
A six-year-old noticed that.
On every building,
he saw the Hajduk crest.
That’s just how we in Split are.
We’re not easy to deal with, but...
I remember when Jugoplastika
won everything. Just like you.
You were our role models.
We were proud of you.
Even though we footballers
played well in Yugoslavia.
We won the Yugoslav Cup,
but that can’t compare to you.
You come from an individual sport...
Somehow, we always had success
in individual sports.
But here, people prefer team sports.
Because in them, there’s chemistry,
energy, and tactics.
Where the rule is that the team
is greater than the sum of its parts.
But what’s interesting is that
both before and after...
At one point, Croatia had three cases:
Kostelić's, Ivanišević, and Vlašić.
In just a few years.
Reaching the very top
in individual sports.
And then Blanka, and later Nikola.
But Blanka, you, Janica, and Ivica...
All these names
have one common factor.
Incredible commitment,
dedication, and parental influence.
Going back to a question...
What if your father Srđan
and mother took you to an academy?
Would you have succeeded?
-I think I would have.
Because Srđan would
have come to see how I play.
He would have come to check.
He never really interfered with
the work of any coach I had.
He would come to tournaments and watch
everything, but he didn't get involved.
Thank God that I got to have many great
coaches and players around me back home.
I was younger back then, so I kind of...
He never held me back. He was just...
He was just hanging around.
-Exactly, he was around.
And the only thing he would ever say
was: 'Nobody touches the serve.'
And yes, in Split we've always been
known for team sports like football,
with Jugoplastika and Hajduk. Then we
had those incredible water polo teams,
Mornar, Jadran, and Pošk,
that were European champions...
We've always had sailing, rowing,
but also strong judokas,
wrestlers, boxers, and weightlifters.
But it was always kind of collective.
Even handball - look at
Pero Metličić and Ivano Balić...
Of course, they're from there too...
Yes, absolutely.
But in individual sports,
it's different.
For example, I never liked anyone
watching me while I trained.
I had my own crew, my own team,
and that's a whole different thing.
In your sport, it's normal
to have people around.
You can mention Steffi Graf's father,
or Monica Seles' dad, or Becker's,
and then of course the Williams sisters,
Nadal's uncle, Djokovic's father...
There's always someone who has to be
there to offer immense support.
I think these are sports where you
must have your family's support.
It's very hard to succeed if you don't.
Someone from your family
has to be there,
although they don't need to be
tennis players themselves.
Take Nadal's uncle, for example,
the guy's a genius.
You can tell it's a successful family.
His brother played
sports at a high level.
But Nadal is naturally right-handed. His
uncle made him switch hands somehow...
And who knows if Nadal would've been
as good had he stayed right-handed?
How can you know something like that?
Those methods are often
right on the edge.
On the edge of genius and madness.
But he is a genius,
and he turned Nadal into one too.
And imagine what kind of struggle
the kid had to go through? Right?
I don't know how it all came about,
because he's completely right-handed.
It's unbelievable
how his uncle saw that.
And of course, there's the process
Đoković's father went through...
With Federer, I'm not as familiar
with the background.
But in every case, a parent
has to sacrifice something
for their child to make it in sport.
Look at the Kostelić family,
their story is in a league of its own.
It's incredible. There's no snow
in Sljeme, and from there came
the best female skier in the world
and the best male skier too.
It's truly something else.
Then you have Blanka...
Joško was a top-level decathlete...
-And her mom was a track athlete too...
Yes, the whole family was into sports...
They created something unbelievable.
Back when we were doing athletics,
it was just something...
And then Blanka came along,
and it all changed.
For me, it was always a dream
to attend that meeting in Zurich.
I used to watch it on TV, athletics and
Zurich... That was just magical for me.
Athletics is honestly one of
my favorite sports to watch.
And then when someone
from Croatia makes it to the top,
someone you can cheer for like a
neighbor, that's something special.
Parents simply have to be involved...
That's just how it is
with individual sports.
Often those methods, as mentioned
earlier, are on the edge of what's okay.
And you hear people say,
assuming the stories are even true,
since they tend to get exaggerated,
'How can you do that to your own child?'
But in truth, that's the only
person you can do that to.
Because when it comes from a parent,
the love and the good intention
are unquestionable. -Exactly.
Let me go back for a second,
this isn't related to the topic,
but it caught my interest.
You mentioned Nadal's uncle switching
him from right to left hand.
Is being a lefthanded person
really that much of an advantage?
And where does that advantage
actually come from?
Well, first of all,
he's not a 'classic' lefthander.
We left-handers tend to
think a little differently.
But in terms of tennis, there aren't
many left-handers at the top level,
and it's tough to play
against them. -Why?
Because the ball moves differently,
the serve is different,
the spins are different,
everything changes.
Your whole game plan shifts
when you're playing against a lefty.
I never liked playing against
left-handers. -You didn't? -No.
No, because I know how they think,
so I'd overanalyze everything
and end up driving myself crazy.
Everything just feels off
when you're up against them...
So yeah, it's definitely an advantage.
I think his uncle sensed that.
And knowing the kind of phenomenon
Nadal is, he understood it.
People always talk about
Nadal's forehand,
but when you watch his backhand,
it's actually like a forehand
with his right hand. That's why
his backhand is so powerful.
I see. So for him, it's essentially
a forehand with his right hand.
That's right. You use it
to support your backhand.
Yes, he uses his left hand,
but his right hand is the key.
For my backhand, my left hand
must finish the stroke.
Actually, no, I meant that for
right-handers, their right hand matters.
So, he relies on that right hand...
When you watch him, some people
might not have noticed that
in a few of his backhands, it's as if
he smashes the ball like with a hammer,
the ball flies at around 800 km/h,
at that kind of speed...
His movement, his technique,
it's all special.
He never had a crazy good serve,
but because he's left-handed,
his serve was still super effective.
I wouldn't say he was one of the best
servers of all time, he was solid,
but being a lefty made his serve tricky.
He'd pull you way out wide,
and then you're defending with
a backhand or with a forehand.
If he were right-handed, that serve
wouldn't have been half as effective.
But being left-handed added
50% more to its impact.
So basically, like you said, he got a
left hand without losing the right one.
That's why I really respect him.
He's truly special.
But again, only someone close,
like an uncle, could do that.
If some guy named Pedro from Mallorca
had come to him and said,
'Hey, I think you should switch hands,'
Exactly. -That's why you need that
family support. It has to be there.
What do you think, what advice
would you give to parents today?
I see it with my own kids,
they want to try a bit of everything.
We've said before that it's not a bad
idea for kids to try several sports
to figure out what suits them best.
But do you think we should let them
just do whatever they want,
a bit of dance, a bit of tennis,
a bit of football, a bit of gymnastics,
or should parents be a bit more involved
in guiding and supporting them?
At a certain point,
you have to be involved.
I look at kids today, they jump
between 800 different sports.
The moment they realize
they're not good at something,
they immediately move on to
the next thing, and parents allow it.
And in the end, they get lost.
A parent has to be the voice of reason,
the one who calms them down
and insists that they stick with
a sport for at least a few months,
not switching every three days.
I see this all the time
with young tennis players.
I'll give you an example...
I remember every single coach I had
since I was eight years old.
I know their names, their surnames,
and exactly what they taught me.
But if you ask a kid today what their
coach's name is, they have no idea.
Because they already know
that in a month,
when the coach starts
pushing them a bit,
their parents won't allow anyone to
'talk to their child that way,'
and they'll switch coaches.
Coaches are being replaced like
products on an assembly line.
That didn't exist before. -Yeah. The
whole sense of respect has collapsed.
Exactly. Parents have to be
the ones who bring that stability.
Sure, you can give your child some
freedom, but at a certain point,
you have to tell them
it's time to get serious,
if they really want to pursue it.
And if they don't, then let them
play sports recreationally.
The driving from one place to the next
is all fine if you've got the time.
But then parents wait around for them,
hover over everything...
Sometimes, you also need to just let
the kids go and figure things out.
The mistake parents make today is that
they give their kids too much,
and then the kids get overwhelmed
and can't handle the pressure.
Balance is key.
A child has to be a child. You have to
let them grow up and make mistakes.
You can't prevent them from making
mistakes. Let them fail sometimes,
let them fall a bit, because
if you never let them fall,
one day they'll fall hard,
and they won't be able to get back up.
But if they fall a little, shake it off,
stand up, and keep going. -Exactly.
Parents also need to work on themselves,
so they don't make big mistakes.
Absolutely, I completely agree.
I say the same thing to my own kids.
Especially parents
in those formative years,
when puberty starts, when new
challenges and changes come,
and that phase in sport
when things don't go well,
and the child just wants to give up...
Anyone would.
The parent's role is not to
push too hard, but to guide,
to navigate, like we say.
To nudge them a little.
I always tell my kids:
"Try it for six months.
You don't have to switch through 60
sports. Stick with it for six months,
and if you don't like it
after that, fine, change.
But you can't just keep changing
and changing endlessly."
Exactly. I totally agree with that.
Agassi once said that tennis is
the loneliest sport in the world.
And for me, the first thing
that comes to mind
when I think of tennis is solitude.
You're alone.
From those formative years,
12 years and up,
when tournaments start,
and they start early.
When we went to tournaments,
not all of us were outgoing
or eager to make friends,
but we were a group, a little crew.
We were strong together.
Someone in the group would be bold
enough to go talk to the Dinamo kids.
We'd be playing in places like Skradin.
Not all of us were brave, but
someone was, and then we'd tag along,
talk a bit, mix with others...
In tennis, you do everything
on your own. There's no one.
And then you're pulled out of
regular life, you leave school...
So tell me, isn't that just
too much to ask of a child?
Even today, when that's become
a kind of norm,
isn't it still an enormous sacrifice
just to maybe reach something?
Yes, it is a lot, but maybe
that's just the way the times are.
They did pull me out of school, but
I wish we had online schooling then.
If I'd had access to a laptop,
it would've made a huge difference.
I had so much free time
and nothing to do with it.
If online school had existed,
it would've been great.
But then again, who ever asked us
if we had any wishes or needs?
Who asked me, at 15 or 17 years old,
if I was feeling pressure? No one.
No one said anything.
It was just: "Go, play, move forward."
And now, it's all like: "Oh no, is it
too much for him? Will he burn out?"
Everyone's so careful
about every little thing.
But that's exactly why rankings exist.
That's why we can tell who's
going to be a champion and who's not.
It's just obvious who can handle
pressure, who can take the hits...
You have to take the hits sometimes,
or else you'll go down.
The ones who can take the hits,
they come out on top.
If you're afraid of making mistakes...
Well, you're going to make them anyway.
That's inevitable. -Absolutely.
And you can't succeed if you're afraid.
I can't be sitting around worrying:
"Oh no, what if this happens..."
Okay, not everyone's the same,
and sure, times have changed.
But a champion is a champion.
A real champion is born once
in a hundred thousand years,
like Novak in tennis,
or Luka in football...
And do you think anyone
asked them if it was hard?
Of course, it was hard.
Of course, it was tough.
It's tough for everyone at some point.
That's just how it is.
I'm aware that once you
reach a certain level,
there's no way you can keep up if
you don't have the right nutrition,
the right support system, all of it.
Once you hit that senior level
and you're tearing it up,
I get it completely...
I told you before, back when
times were a lot more normal,
I didn't go on my school trips in eighth
grade or third year of high school
because of a tournament.
And now, looking back as a parent, I ask
myself: was it really such a big deal
if I had missed five days
of training for a school trip?
A school trip is something beautiful,
a memory for life.
And beyond that, it enriches you,
it might even help your career
because you come back
a different person.
Nowadays... of course, if a 14-year-old
has a strength coach and a nutritionist,
and they hear there's a school trip
coming up, they'll say,
'Are you crazy?
You can't go on a trip!
Eating hot dogs for seven days,
skipping training…'
But what I'm saying is - can you
do both when you're still young?
I think you can. And honestly,
I think you should, up to a point.
It also depends on the sport you're in,
but I believe it's possible,
and that it has to be done that way.
Some things last a lifetime.
You won’t remember hitting
20 forehands in practice,
but you'd remember going
on a trip, as you said.
Those things last. -Yes.
Life is balance.
In general, you must deal
with these things,
but I think everyone
should experience them.
That stays with you forever.
If you miss three training days,
you won’t be better or worse.
On the other hand, what you
just mentioned, those 20 forehands,
and the fact you said at lunch,
how many reps it takes for
the brain to maybe accept it.
Yes, between 10k and 50k reps
for the brain to process it.
They do 5-6 and say,
"I can't do it."
What do you mean? You watch him,
should I send him home now or in 5 min.
"I can't do it."
End of discussion.
Friend, if you can't do it,
train, put it in your head, then...
That's dedication.
-It's not for you.
Dedication, but it becomes
too early, inhumane.
I started at seven when
I went to school,
now kids at 7-8-9
are semi-pros.
They train 3-4 hours a day.
I think that's too much.
At 7 years old? -8, 9 years,
but you will hit a wall.
They will catch up to you.
Then what? Five, six, seven,
eight? You can't.
Your body can't take it.
Neither mind nor brain.
You fall back, while the other
one catches up. Then panic.
Then you wonder how
he caught up. -How?
Change the coach, he's bad.
Change everything. City,
coach, club. Nothing works.
Yeah, yeah. Oh, my mother.
You mentioned a few times...
You mentioned a few times
that tennis is a gladiator sport.
And when I thought about it...
I’ve loved tennis forever.
It’s truly incredible. Look at
number one... Everyone comments.
Number one, you're alone.
As Sampras said,
"I can't pass the ball.
I have to solve it."
No Ladić to save a penalty, no Šuker
to score or Bokšić. How is that?
No one, just you.
You simply accept it.
You know it's just you.
Then comes adrenaline. -Adrenaline.
You must be good with yourself.
Be your own friend,
with the racket, the situation.
But, as you said, adrenaline.
I decide. -Yes.
I decide where to hit.
I decide how...
You have everything in your hands.
I see he's done.
Will I let him back in the match?
Many times, simply...
What I don’t like in tennis now
is too many tournaments.
No sport is like tennis,
where the year ends if you
reach the Davis Cup final.
You have Torino, Masters in late November,
and by mid-December, you must go to Australia.
How is that normal? -Yes.
-It's impossible.
You need rest, prep for Australia.
Some matches last year
ended at 4 AM.
4 AM? No way you’ll be ready.
You go to sleep, reach the hotel,
and it's 7-8 AM.
What? You sleep till 5 PM
and must play tomorrow.
They started changing things,
but still... -Solution?
Matches can't be played after 12,
but they can still last... -Cosmetics.
Too many tournaments,
too many demands, it's too much...
Every week, 2-3 tournaments,
every week something...
You said it ends in November,
but mid-December, you’re in Australia.
Can you choose tournaments
and take a break? -You can.
If you want to stay on top.
-But how do you choose?
You won’t take a break
when you're doing well.
You must plan some schedule.
Now, the good thing is that courts
are much more alike.
Clay, grass, concrete.
It’s all balanced out.
So, adaptation is easier.
Only on grass, running is tricky.
But statistically, which I think
is crazy, in recent years
longer rallies happen at Wimbledon
than at Roland Garros.
Longer rallies? -Yes. It just looks
fast on TV with all the sliding.
But grass is extremely slow.
The fastest Slam is Australia.
That's why it's the best.
It rewards aggressive tennis.
It rewards you when you attack,
you win the point.
On fast courts, they return everything.
So, you’d have a better chance
to win Paris than London now?
Well, I mean, it's faster. In my time,
grass was like playing on ice. -Yeah.
But too much... Now we had Australia,
then the American tour, then clay.
Then comes the grass season.
After two weeks, Wimbledon, three.
After Roland Garros last year,
there was the Olympics.
What to play, what to skip? Now,
for money, these 1000s last two weeks.
Madness. You play Madrid for two weeks,
Rome for two, a week off,
then Paris for two weeks.
That's six weeks.
So, the grass has slowed down?
First, you're alone, right?
There's no one there.
Second, no coach.
Now they allow a bit,
but you said 90% of what Djokovic,
especially on big courts,
what Djokovic tells you,
you don't hear it.
So, no coach.
You're all on your own.
He can't tell you anything.
How do you communicate?
With signals?
Now it's allowed if the player
is on the side of the coach,
he can come... -Ten seconds?
-Not sure, maybe 10-15.
In those 10-15 seconds,
you can say something.
Novak didn’t come to you.
He liked to shout from 100 meters.
Well, I can’t hear you. I don’t know.
So...
I still say, you enter alone,
you play alone... That’s just how it is.
I can tell you to move your feet,
toss the ball higher, lower, and so on.
But the tactics are clear.
They've played everyone 100 times.
It's all analyzed before the match.
Stats show where each serve goes.
But what if you notice
the opponent changed tactics?
Do you let him know?
-Now we have an iPad in the box.
You see he changed his serve pattern,
serves more there, so you tell him:
"Step closer. Cover this side,
move forward, go back."
There are those things, but still...
Some players like it, some don’t.
With some, you must time it perfectly.
It has nothing to do with tennis.
It just needs to click for them...
A coach must know these things.
You have to be quick.
It helps when you speak the same language.
Saying it in English isn't the same.
By the time I translate, I lose it.
Saying it directly is much easier.
Those are the two things.
You're alone, no coach.
Well, there's a coach,
but it’s like he isn’t there.
You can't just "pull the handbrake."
You can’t slow down.
As Agassi says:
"One of the best things in tennis
is that time never runs out.
As long as we play, I have a chance."
Or as Nadal says: "I play every
point like my life depends on it."
It's not like football,
where you lead 2-0, 1-0,
or even 3-0. You draw back,
wait for them to come at you.
Even in other sports.
In boxing, you win five rounds,
so you take it easy,
your coach is there.
Here, you can't do anything.
Yeah, here you can't calculate.
You can't say, "I'm up 2-0 in sets,
I'll rest now, lose one..."
That’s not how tennis works.
Mentally, you're up 2-0 in sets,
lose the third. Now he has the edge.
Momentum. -He has momentum,
going into the fifth. You know,
you can't just say,
"I’ll step back, defend, maybe he..."
Maybe he what? He won’t.
In your head, it's easier, I'm up two sets,
maybe I can make a mistake.
But I can’t make too many,
because it shifts fast,
and suddenly it’s 2-2 in sets.
Where are you now?
OK, they added a tie-break
in the fifth set, which is good.
No more at Wimbledon 70-68,
where you have two "dead" players.
The loser is "dead,"
the winner is also "dead."
His next match is already lost...
-No chance.
They played for three days.
Some record. What record?
Both players are "dead."
Fourth, and just as tough...
You're alone. There's no one there.
You can’t relax. You don’t play
for half an hour, sprinting to 10.
Every other game, you sit alone,
and that’s a ton of time.
When it's not going well,
it feels endless.
As Federer says, he's very positive,
and that helps him in tough moments.
But if you have a problem,
you know what that is?
You're alone, thinking about everything.
You must focus on the next point,
but your mind is stuck on the last one.
How do you...
Who can handle that?
Well, it's not easy,
but you just get used to it.
Everyone has a ritual.
I had a ritual-looking at the crowd,
finding someone. It calmed me.
Some watch people,
some sing something.
Everyone has their own way,
everyone calms down differently.
It all changes really fast,
really, really fast.
Especially when playing the best.
You can't allow even a little...
They eat you up. Like a shark.
Once they smell blood,
you're done. You can't.
For example, Novak...
Sinner is like that, Alcaraz isn’t.
Alcaraz plays one set, you may
not win a single point,
but then he gives you the next.
He's... -Unstable? -Well, a bit...
I prefer watching him.
Sinner is more like Novak.
When Sinner grabs you,
you might as well leave.
You have no chance.
He doesn't let go.
He's always the same,
just grinds you down.
Alright, after all that,
your reward at season’s end
is that next year it means nothing.
You must defend points,
and start all over again.
-You panic again.
Here I defend something,
there I have a gap.
How do I plan my schedule?
Maybe I invest more here,
defend those,
then come the points,
so panic kicks in... -Who does that?
You as a coach or him as a player?
Well, coach and player decide.
They discuss it. With Novak,
it was easy... I mean, "easy."
During COVID, it wasn't.
There he could play, there he couldn't.
They allow him, we pack up, we go.
Then a minister says no.
So, you go back. But usually,
a schedule is made.
One that can always,
of course, be changed.
Rarely does a schedule
get fully completed.
That’s a rare thing.
Something can always happen,
God forbid, an injury,
or if you have weaker results,
you might want to add a tournament.
But more or less,
the schedule is known.
A schedule is made
six to eight months in advance,
maybe even longer,
and then it's followed.
When you mentioned Novak,
what was the hardest thing
to work on with him,
and what was the easiest?
I don’t know what could be
"the hardest."
What did he not accept?
What didn’t he want?
He’s quite serious,
he likes biomechanics
and many similar things.
It's not that I don’t believe in that,
but some things have
nothing to do with biomechanics.
You can't think about biomechanics,
about your hips, your knees,
when you throw the ball
for your serve
and the sun hits your eyes
and you can't see anything.
You can't see the ball.
For one second, you can't see the ball
and you hit it blindly.
You can't think about your hip
while serving
when you're as blind as a bat.
There's also the wind.
It's about survival. And pressure, yes.
-Your pulse is 200.
He wants to be perfect at it.
He's a perfectionist.
I am too, but you have to
find some balance.
And the easiest thing for me was that,
I’ve never seen a tennis player
who can not play tennis
for two months
and then play as if
he never even stopped.
He plays like he had been training five
hours a day for the past two months.
Such timing, such a feel for the court,
for the ball, for the space,
I’ve never seen
anything like it in my life.
Nadal is not like that.
He has to train every day, otherwise...
Is it the psyche, or...
the feel in the hand?
It’s simply the way you play.
Nadal is wearing
himself out too much.
Every training session of his
looks like there is no tomorrow.
Each of his shots is
as if there is no tomorrow.
It’s similar with Federer,
but with him, it looks more beautiful.
But with him, it’s such timing,
such beauty.
You watch and feel
almost hypnotized.
And all of his preparation...
How he prepares, how he eats.
Nutrition, training, it’s all one
experience, and it's beautiful to see.
It’s beautiful to be part of that.
Yes, there are things
you can’t even hold against him
when he’s won everything.
Of course. -But, there’s some kind
of balance and public respect.
It was phenomenal with him.
Those are things you can never forget.
And if I never do anything
related to tennis,
I’ll know that I was part of the team
of the greatest player in history.
And with all those records,
even if I just sat there
and carried rackets, it can still be
said that I did something.
You once said that...
Is there something missing in tennis
when it comes to that
sense of belonging,
in the sense that you
don’t have your own club,
you don’t have a league,
your own locker room,
you don’t have a jersey, home fans...
I noticed you said about Đoković
that he’s 5000 times more motivated
when he plays for Serbia, than otherwise.
Let’s remember you when you played
for Croatia in the Davis Cup,
not to mention Barcelona,
where in singles, you won the last
four matches in five sets.
So, that’s a huge patriotism
and a huge desire
to do something for your country.
Yes, with him, that’s very pronounced
and it’s something incredible.
We saw that last year, when his goal
was to win the Olympic Games.
And there was no way
he was going to lose that match.
If they had played for 15 days in a row,
him and Alcaraz,
he would have won that match.
It’s simply his desire.
And when he plays for the Davis Cup
or any other Cup for Serbia,
he gives his all.
But we’re talking about you,
and you also gave your all
in the last four matches,
all five sets. That’s 20 sets.
That was something special.
That was the first time I played
for Croatia in the Olympics.
I was carrying the flag.
One or two matches, I was the reason
why the match lasted five sets,
but fatigue wasn’t an option.
I’m dead, but I’m not.
It’s +400°C, but I’m playing.
I simply had to win that medal.
I’m sorry, we also played doubles
and lost in five sets in the semifinals,
but we could have won
at least a silver.
But, at least we have that Davis Cup.
What bothers me is,
that because of money,
because of some interests,
and it doesn’t exist in sports,
except in tennis,
where a football player comes,
whom I highly respect
and who has won everything,
and changes the rule in the oldest
tennis competition ever.
And that’s because of money.
He brought his company
that entered tennis
to turn the Davis Cup
into a World Championship
where everyone will play
in one place.
It’s good for the host country.
When Malaga was the host
and when the Spaniards were playing,
the stadiums were full.
But when Canada and Chile played,
only five people showed up.
Tennis is not football.
It doesn’t work like that.
When home matches are played,
people come to watch, to cheer.
We just played in Osijek against
Slovakia and the atmosphere was great.
It was crazy, the atmosphere.
And that’s what’s missing, that energy.
And when it was in South America,
when it was in Argentina,
it wasn’t pleasant to play there,
but it was a blast.
When we played against Argentina,
Maradona came,
and the match was interrupted
for 15 minutes.
The match was interrupted!
He came into our locker room,
I even have a picture at home.
So, it was a break in the game.
Tennis was interrupted.
The Argentinians were singing,
we were singing.
We didn’t know what we were singing,
but we were singing. Maradona came.
We could’ve sung
for another two hours.
Tennis didn’t matter anymore.
And that’s incredible.
The stadium was full,
maybe 7-8 thousand people.
But, for me, it was a blast
playing there.
So, 8 000 people are singing,
cheering, and provoking you,
but for me, that’s a blast.
-You’d play there every day.
Yes, every day, because in the end,
when Ljubo and I won
the doubles match, 8 000 people
stood up and applauded,
they were singing to me.
-Impossible.
And even if they hadn’t,
it doesn’t matter,
but the atmosphere was incredible.
They even helped me.
Then it all collapsed
and went bankrupt,
and now that Davis Cup
is neither here nor there.
It would be like
if Nadal and Federer
came and changed the rules
of the Champions League.
What would they say to them:
'You two, respect,
but those are the doors, so leave.'
And this in tennis, not padel.
Tennis is a global sport.
Yes, I don’t understand that part.
There’s money, madness,
but where are we now? Nowhere.
Yes.
When you said about Đoković,
that he can take a break...
What does a week
at a tournament look like?
How much do you train,
how much do you play?
You can’t, when you go to
a tournament, overdo it with training.
Preparation is done before you
go to the tournament.
When you arrive at the tournament,
training depends
on the type of competition.
If you’re playing a Grand Slam,
you play every other day,
and if you’ve played 3-4 sets,
the next day you have
a training session
of 45 minutes maximum.
You work on something
that maybe wasn’t good.
The very next day?
-Yes, right away.
Even though you play again
the day after tomorrow?
No matter. -That’s fascinating.
Some say you lose the feel,
some say it’s the mind,
but why do you play today,
sometimes even tomorrow,
and regardless of what
you play tomorrow afternoon,
you still have to train in the morning.
Is that pure activation or...?
It depends. Some people need to
warm up for 45 minutes before a match.
And that’s 45 minutes
of intense warm-up.
That’s not what we see
on the court, but inside?
Exactly, it’s intense.
Some people 15 minutes, some 20.
It all depends on the person.
Novak did another great thing.
He won a Grand Slam,
without the day off in between.
And that’s because of
some other factors.
It can be played like that.
So, it’s all in the mind. -Yes.
But that’s some kind of ritual.
They go to the gym a bit,
then some ice baths,
a bit of this, a bit of that…
But if the match was long,
or if a rest day is taken,
then you warm up longer on match day,
or if the match was easier,
you train, not longer than 45 minutes.
It’s enough to just get a good workout.
How exhausting is it to play,
both mentally and physically,
a match of 3-4, even 5 hours?
Are you dead after that?
Then you have many
ups and downs.
It also depends on
where you’re playing.
For example, if you’re
playing in Australia
in those extreme heat conditions,
or a night match,
there’s a huge difference.
Then you have the US Open,
where there’s a lot of humidity.
You can wring out your sock
after a few games.
Those are the ups and downs.
The question is only
how you’ll handle it.
You can’t train for that.
That’s the good and bad part.
It's good, because you
don’t know what to expect.
You can’t play like
it’s a friendly match.
Who cares about a friendly match,
and who cares about a friendly game.
And you don’t know what to expect.
You can be in the best shape,
and still be hit by panic or cramps.
You don’t know how that could happen,
you’re in the best shape,
you did the best preparations.
What do you do now?
You don’t have
a physiotherapist for cramps,
you have to take care of it yourself.
Sometimes it passes,
sometimes it doesn’t.
These are huge shocks
for the body. As for this...
So how do you train the next day?
I’ll give you an example
of how it is with us.
Sometimes, when I talk to someone,
this isn’t the first time,
I’m sometimes ashamed
of how much we train. Really.
Let’s take the Premier League
as an example where I worked.
Once a year, and only there,
nowhere else,
when Christmas is approaching,
when Boxing Day is
on December 26th, they play
on December 28th,
and there’s less than 48 hours
between two matches.
That’s when the alert goes off.
It’s been like that for years.
When that period comes,
then the strategy is made
with the medical team to decide
who can play and who cannot.
And you have 25 players,
you can rotate them,
do whatever you want...
And that only happens
that one single time.
You, in fact, play like
that all the time. -Yes.
When you play a normal tournament
that lasts a week,
you can have one day off
and then play every day.
A Grand Slam, every other day,
but then it rains.
And then again, there’s injustice,
because, for example,
Wimbledon has two roofs.
Those who play under the roof
finish their match,
and since it can rain
for 2-3 days at Wimbledon,
the others fall behind
and have to play every day.
Do they need to catch up?
-That’s right.
So, if you’re better,
you still have privileges.
But if you play for 4-5 hours today,
there’s no need to train tomorrow.
You can stretch, you can run
a little in the park, and that’s it.
And get a good night’s sleep.
Because, when you go
to the courts, warm up,
come back, you lose 5-6 hours.
For what?
So, when those tough matches
were played,
there was no training the next day.
You simply skip it.
You stretch a little and we
see each other on match day,
with a longer warm-up, and that’s it.
-Looking at this now, you cover
a long period, like I do in football.
There’s the period when you played,
and now when you’re a coach.
Has tennis changed, and if it has,
how much has it changed?
I’m not talking about faster balls,
better rackets, or surfaces
which you said have become
more equal.
I’m talking about technical
and tactical changes.
Or is there no room for changes
in individual sports?
I tell everyone there is
a forehand, a backhand and serve.
If you don't do it, the other will.
Technically, they don't play better.
Few of them come to the net,
few of them use the volley. -Why?
Simply because the surfaces are slower
and they're afraid of getting passed.
They don’t feel comfortable,
they're not used to it.
Matches last longer,
everyone serves over 220.
Is the surface slower?
-Yes, it's slower.
Returns are better than before.
The thing that will be equalized
is there will be no difference
between the first and second serve.
In a few years, it will be like that.
Wasn't it the same with you?
-Well, no.
We have a French player whose
average second serve is 220.
Average? -That means,
first serve 230, second 237.
Simply, more and more
these bomb serves will be used,
because they have more faith in it.
Even though you're risking?
-Well, you have two serves.
If you can't hit one of the two, then...
If you hit it weaker, he'll attack you.
More or less, it's played tactically.
They all know how each one plays.
At any given moment, it's clear.
I know 90% of them.
The player you're facing
can't surprise you.
Could he invent something new?
-Well, no...
He can surprise me once in 50,
when out of desperation he hits.
But rarely does anyone surprise me
that I'd say: "Look at this!"
He can surprise me with a set,
but the whole match, hardly.
Simply, they train like that,
but that training can't be
transferred to the match,
because you never know what awaits
you and when it awaits you.
Who comes to court. -There's
also the opponent, of course.
That's the key. Bravo!
A few more questions.
Is there friendship in tennis,
in the white circus, as they say?
And enmity? Who are you
on good terms with?
You said you didn't exchange
even 16 words with Sampras?
No, he's a weirdo.
I was on good terms with Agassi.
And with Courier, too.
One of my best friends was the current
ATP president, Andrea Gaudenzi.
In my time it was more friendship,
players were closer,
and they didn't travel with teams.
Now every player has at least
two people on his team.
The better ones can have three
or more people on their team.
So, they're with their own crew.
I'm on good terms with everyone.
Now it's more about respect.
They're not crazy friends.
They won't go to dinner
or hang out much.
Everyone respects everyone.
They hang out in their team
with everyone. -And the coaches?
Fitness and physical coaches...
-It's like the engine is running.
From tournament to tournament.
Pack up and let's go.
So, before, people hung out
more than now?
It must be, if you don't want
me to go to dinner alone.
If you didn't take Kuzzi?
Then knock on Agassi's door.
Because it's the same for him. -Yes.
Agassi once said: "In tennis every
match is a miniature of life."
Even the terms in tennis
are connected to life.
Serve, favor, break, advantage...
Even love.
Would you do it all over again?
Would you play tennis again?
Is this your life? -Yes!
I would choose tennis again, but maybe
I would do something differently.
I don't know if it would be
better or worse? But it's tennis.
Does your son play tennis?
-Yes, he does.
But I think you're destined
to play one sport.
The one above wanted it.
And that's simply love.
You have to love what you do.
I love all sports, but still,
tennis is tennis.
I'm glad I decided
about my own destiny. -Yes.
No one else can decide that.
Am I cheating?
Have I crossed the line?
Am I offside by a millimeter or two?
There’s no such thing.
I can’t blame anyone.
Because I’m always
the only one responsible.
I made the decisions.
Good, bad, wrong, right.
But I made them myself.
-I completely agree with that.
If there are athletes,
you belong among them.
Perišić and you, if you had
trained volleyball or handball,
you’d still be national team players.
Or football, same thing.
There are many specifics.
These other sports.
But an athlete is an athlete.
That’s right, an athlete
will be good at any sport, but still...
The best is in football.
I saw a football player
playing top-level tennis.
Diego Forlán plays
Challenger tournaments.
You have to reach that level.
You have to step onto the court,
because these are people
who play serious tennis.
He played,didn’t win,
played doubles, but he plays.
And that’s Challenger, and at
the World Championship level...
There are also many tennis players
who play top-level golf,
but they’re not Tiger Woods.
They go to tournaments,
play among themselves, incredible.
Maybe they didn’t get the score,
not even close,
the crowd and all that...
It’s like in football,
when they play well...
But if you put him in a match,
and someone slides in from 30 meters
with their boots, it’s over...
-That’s right.
You shouldn’t have brought him in now,
but when he was seven...
Then it’s a different question.
-That’s right.
We can’t know, but something...
Something led you there.
Maybe you were in two sports,
but you chose this one.
Something happened, that’s why
someone chose the sport they’re good at.
It’s simple,
there are no rules here.
In the end, for our Drago Marić,
for the kids, for the parents...
So, your son Emanuel plays tennis?
Do you advise him in the same way
Srđan advised you, or not?
I try, but how much he listens
to me, that’s a different question.
But I feel there’s some
kind of resistance.
I’d like him to ask me more...
But I leave him...
He has his coaches, his path,
I’m here when he needs something.
I help him.
He’s currently
the best Croatian junior.
Honestly, there’s
no magic crystal ball
to tell us what will happen
to him in life or in tennis.
I’m always here for everything.
Parents should be present
in their child’s life.
They shouldn’t force, but they should
be there to help, with advice,
in one way or another, however they can,
but they have to be present.
Parents are an important link
in that chain, but again...
Parents can’t transfer their
ambitions onto their children,
because then it becomes a vicious
circle that ends in failure.
And in the end, both the child
and the parent are left frustrated.
And that turns into a disaster.
So I want to be his father,
to have a father-son relationship.
If he needs advice, I’m here,
but I don’t want to be his coach.
Never, because I’ve seen many
cases where it didn’t end well.
Especially in tennis, better not.
You said that professional sport
isn’t healthy.
Although, on the other hand,
sport is the best and purest thing,
if you find that balance.
But would you recommend
individual or team sports?
Or should it depend on where
someone finds themselves?
Maybe where someone finds themselves.
I’ve always been for individual sports.
Although football is my favorite sport.
But you can’t force someone
to play or do something.
I think a child,
whether male or female,
has to decide for themselves
which sport to choose.
Which sport they’ll choose,
I can’t say.
I can’t say this is easier,
or that is harder,
everything is difficult.
It’s hard to be a top athlete.
If someone thinks it’s easy...
Now they look at Instagram,
and they see the end result...
But how much blood, sweat,
how many ups and downs there were...
It doesn’t matter if you have a team
with you or if you’re alone.
Maybe it’s harder when you’re alone,
you’re happy and afraid by yourself.
In football, there are 11 people,
you’re happy together,
you cry together. But it’s hard.
Whoever wants to be an athlete
must be ready for falls,
for sacrifice, for mistakes.
You shouldn’t be afraid
to make mistakes,
because you’ll certainly
make a lot of them.
You said it well.
For me, individual sports
are harder.
If it were easy,
everyone would do it.
As Steffi Graf says, you can’t
succeed if you haven’t fallen.
That’s how it is.
Once again, thank you
for this long conversation.
Just tell me one more thing.
Some of my fans
from WBA asked me,
even though you already
told me once, "Why WBA?"
That’s a crazy story.
My good friend, a journalist,
how they root for theis clubs...
and that’s a whole other level.
It was 2003 or 2004...
WBA was losing games...
We were at a tournament,
he was watching them, crying.
I wondered what was wrong
with him, he was shaking.
So I started watching it with him.
Since then, I’ve been
rooting for WBA with him.
He’s a journalist of course,
always at the club.
They invited me too.
It’s not easy being a fan.
We’re always up and down,
like a yo-yo.
But once you start,
you can’t stop.
Then you’re eternal.
Even you came...
Akrobinović said:
"We have to go, we have to go..."
Unfortunately, there’s never
enough time.
Everything goes by so fast.
But since 2003-2004,
I’ve been their fan. -Bravo!
Thank you. It’s my pleasure.
-Thank you.